the concept of consent
has come to take on tremendous political
significance
in the 21st century political
it didn't have in the 20th century
i think the use of the concept of
consent
in the context of date rape
has sort of transformed the way people
think about
the consent of the governed
the role of consent
in government itself without people
really thinking clearly
about why that is or how much of
anything
in government is supposed to work
there was a housing development in a
cheap suburb of toronto
that ended up with one really run down
shabby apartment building over here
inhabited almost entirely
by palestinian refugees and another
apartment building
just as shabby just as run down across
the parking lot
that was all israeli immigrants
and they hated each other cordially
and i remember reading a newspaper
article about these two
of our buildings this kind of contrast i
would say is more common
in london england but it was an
extraordinary i mean
in exactly the same circumstances that
led palestinians to come and live in
this particular neighborhood this
particular
apartment building led jewish settlers
to settlers
we can't use those settlers jewish
immigrants to come and live in the same
neighborhood
and they would not consent
to have their children go to the same
school
right they would not consent
to have their children perhaps will
differ from family and family that
wouldn't want their children learning
the theory of evolution
neither one of those groups living in
those two apartment buildings
would consent to study the same
curriculum
about world war ii and the holocaust
right and yet that's exactly what the
government wants to do
is to force those two groups of people
to go to the same school
for their children to see one another
face to face
to challenge the bigotry and ignorance
of their own parents
that the children will learn the
government's version
of biology including evolution that
they're going to learn the government's
version
of what happened in world war ii and
that may lead to
squabbles around the family during the
real conflicts
with their parents where they say look
dad this is what you told me
happened in world war ii in the whole
and this is what they say at school
and that that could be just as much a
source of tension
within a jewish israeli family as it
would be within a palestinian family
but all of these issues probably much
more extreme for
muslim immigrants in canada struggling
with those issues right
so if you believe in this concept that
government cannot do anything
without the consent of the governed
right
there's a very real sense in which you
don't believe in education
period there are small towns in canada
this is probably true everywhere in the
world but let's just let's just talk
about canada because i know it well
there's small towns where every single
individual in that town
is a member of a crazy christian cult
crazy is my own editorializing i'm sure
they consider themselves a perfectly
sane
christian cult group okay there are all
kinds of things they won't consent to
they may not consent to have their
children put into schools they also may
not consent to the government coming in
and
forcing them to obey standard traffic
regulations or sewage regulations or
what have you
is it up to the consent of the
individual
of the community even if it's 100
percent of people
in the community to refuse sewage
treatment program
all right it's not the case the
government is something that works
primarily or only
with the consent of the governed and
then it's only some kind of remarkable
exception to the rule or some kind of
footnote to history the government does
something
contrary to the consent of the
government all right
that kind of coercion is government
in principle government is precisely
the force in our society the force in
our lives
that compels the children of palestinian
people
and israeli people to sit down at the
same table in the same classroom and
study the same curriculum with the same
teacher
and some of them are going to make
friends some of them are going to come
home and shock their parents you know
probably
probably there's some palestinians who
end up getting an israeli girlfriend or
israelis get a palestinian boyfriend
probably there are unexpected
friendships that come out of them
probably unexpected conflicts
and rivalry interpolating right the
common table
being created there through education
right that is
government and it comes about through
coercion
it comes about through directly and
flagrantly violating
the consent of the people being governed
each and every day
right water quality sewage treatment
compelling apps taking away everyone's
right everyone's freedom everyone's the
privilege
you probably eat three times a day you
probably go to the bathroom a lot more
often than that you may not think about
you may not think about your freedom in
this relation okay this
is government it's not an exception to
the rule
it is the rule it is rule
in principle what i've seen happen in
the last 20 years
is that more and more this notion of
consent which
has a kind of self-evident significance
when you're talking about date rape
we've talked about romance
about personal regimen it's transformed
the way people
both on the left and on the right think
about government and
you know and it could be added they only
think about this
when it is convenient for them right
uh you know on the right wing
the most obvious theater
the most obvious theater for these
absurdities to uh be played out on to
to demonstrate themselves be you know
anarcho-capitalists
uh libertarians uh their their notion of
non-aggression
and that you know the government should
do absolutely nothing without people
on the left-wing fringe i mean i've
heard lately
from um vegan anti-natalists
who do not believe you have the right
to reproduce to conceive and
give birth to a child because you don't
have
the consent of that child to exist
before it comes into existence i kid you
not those people take their political
movement
uh very seriously and you know in the
middle or
you should say across the whole spectrum
left to right you have
movements towards uh minarchism
minimalism even if it's only aesthetic
forms of ecology that have to do with
minimizing waste
right even just calls for low taxes
civil liberties and freedoms that are
based on
minimizing government right less
less less subtract subtract subtract and
there's not a lot of thought given
to what it is they're subtracting from
and i would i would note
it really just comes up as a late motif
people ask how dare the government
invade iraq without
my permission and they ask
how dare the government invade iraq
without the iraqis permission
to they do they do right
so i think this is a very strange moment
for sort of
coming of age in western democracies
of gaining the maturity to really step
back with detachment
and recognize the coercive and indeed
oppressive nature of government
you've got options you you don't have to
embrace this i really do understand that
some people will make the well-informed
decision
to go and live in a cave that some
people will live in a small
wooden hut in the remote wilderness and
they will get to experience what life is
like
with a minimum of access to government a
minimum of access to
government provided services like
hospitals and education and electricity
and water and sewage treatment plants
when you put yourself out in
that remote wilderness you'll get to see
what life is like
um under those conditions an incredibly
small number of people
will reject the social contract that's
offered by government
but the rest of us i think have to
challenge this consent
centered narrative all right
um people
including people in positions of
political power they don't do
good and they don't do evil
they do things and later
on they find out if those things were
right or wrong later on they find out
if those things were successful or
unsuccessful
um it's very easy to forget now
that in a city like toronto or in a city
like new york
there was a considerable population of
italians
who did not want to go to war
with fascist germany or fascist italy
they may not have been fascists
themselves they may not have really
believed in
or supported mostly but you can imagine
italian americans
italian canadians there was actually a
considerable
public that was in this sense anti-war
if not openly pro-fascist
and that war went ahead
you know without their consent now many
people in a very shallow way invoke
the memory of world war ii as if it were
a
tremendously positive and one-sided
thing
world war ii as fought by the united
states and canada had
unbelievable unforeseen consequences
unbelievably negative unforeseen
consequences
such as the creation of communist china
under the dictatorship of mao zedong
now absolutely nobody who was sitting
down to make that decision and it is
very much a problem
with our democracies that a small number
of people in a small room
make that decision if it's not the case
it's not the case there was some broad
public
uh you know plebiscite to determine but
the people who sat down to make that
decision you can imagine the long list
of priorities that they were thinking
about and worrying about
including including places like
czechoslovakia
and poland and of course england and
france
of all the places on the map that they
were thinking about
certainly the lowest priority possible
would have been china
certainly absolutely nobody was thinking
about how
an alliance against the nazis
with joseph stalin was going to impact
you know their long-term future of china
and japan
if anyone cared it would have been an
unbelievably low priority even compared
to
disputing the future of poland right
disputing the future of greece
there were a lot of different theaters
of of world war ii a lot of different
parts of the map
to be to be known well guess what you
know creating the dictatorship
of mao zedong in china murdered more
people than the nazis
as absolutely terrible as the nazis were
as
compelling as the case was to intervene
and extinguish you know the dictatorship
of adolf hitler
unbelievably if you can sit back and
look at it with detachment that ended up
killing
more innocent people in china than died
in the gas chambers
of europe right now i have jewish
heritage
my own relatives of course unknown to me
and my generation
were killed of course you know if one
could go back
and rewrite history there are many
changes you want to make all right
but i'm not a racist okay i can't sit
here and tell you
that a jewish life is worth more than a
chinese life
that'd be deeply hypocritical and deeply
racist for me all right and
this should be obvious
ask yourself have you ever heard anyone
reflect on this
in any high school history classroom
university history classroom
any textbook you've ever seen any
newspaper
what what i've just said to you sadly
strangely in the 21st century
it remains unthinkable
it remains unthinkable to question how
these decisions are made
what the constant governances were and
this is a kind of index of just how
little
democracy we have you can read the
heartbreaking story of what happened in
the peloponnesian war
in thucydides so this is talking about
ancient athens
and the way decisions were made about
wars at that time
um people seem to remember sparta
as being the opposite of democracy
whereas athens supposedly represents
democracy
let me tell you get a detailed
description of how sparta voted
on whether or not to go to war uh all
the people so they had a room full of
people
and all the people who supported the war
walked over to one wall
and all the people who were against the
war walked them they counted how many
people were standing
on each side of the room oh sparta was a
lot more democratic than canada was
um the united states was in the lead-up
to world war ii right
um there's there's a lot more
uh to be said about that all right
the notion of whether or not anyone
consented
to go to war in world war ii the notion
of whether or not he wanted
meaningful consent before canada decided
to bankrupt itself building a railroad
before the united states decided to
bankrupt itself
putting a man on the moon
any of the things however grand in scale
however really unimaginable in terms of
the millions and billions of dollars in
the budget
or however tiny but really transforming
your life like forcing you to go to that
school or going into that christian
religious community and saying no
we're gonna drag you into the modern
world
along with the sewage treatment plants
and traffic lights and forcing your kids
to go to school with everyone like
you know whatever the some of these
things have budgets in the billions
and are difficult to conceptualize like
putting a man on the moon
or building nuclear weapons or starting
a war an enormous war
entering into a war like world war ii um
some of them are boggling in their scale
and some of them are so
tiny right but this is government
all right government it's so
radically incompatible so fundamentally
profoundly incompatible
with this concept of consent
that as i say is this unexamined
loanword
that's come over from the world of
romance and dating
into you know party politics
it's not the case the government is
something that
primarily and most of the time is
flowing along with public incentive than
just once in a while
just once in a while as a footnote as an
exception of the rule
is contrary to the consent of the
government no
government is very much integrally and
by definition
something oppressive something coercive
something that's happening
contrary to your consent absolutely all
of the time
every time you turn on the tap every
time you flush the toilet
and it is that government that's
burdened you with the whole vocabulary
of politics that you've inherited
examined or unexamined from your primary
school high school textbooks
so on and so forth what whatever it is
you think you know
about politics probably 80 of it growing
up
came from propaganda the questions
you've been taught to ask
the questions you were told never to ask
you had the freedom
to raise your hand in the classroom but
do you know what happened if you dared
to ask the wrong question
right yeah you learned to ask questions
in school you also learn
to remain in silence you learn that
you'll be scolded if you dare to ask
anything unthinkable if you dare to ask
but isn't it the case
that mao zedong killed more people than
idol filler isn't it the case
that mao zedong and joseph stalin both
were our allies we're on our side that
we fought for them and they fought for
us
in this same war that you're presenting
to me as this entirely heroic
narrative if you dare to ask those
questions i mean some of you may have
as children some of you may have had the
experience of asking your teachers some
of you may have had the
experience of asking your parents and
you may know the outcomes
and in all kinds of ways this coercion
the so-called oppression
it does shape who we are it does shape
how we live it does shape
how we think most of all in terms of the
things that are unthinkable
the questions that don't we don't even
think to ask
um
and i say this to you not because i'm an
anarchist
quite the contrary because i think we
now need to take this
next step in the 21st century a step
away from frankly the whole
liberal utilitarian tradition
that defined our way of thinking about
government
as less less less
that defined progress as the creation of
limited government
a limit on the tyranny that supposedly
existed
before